Deprecate import Component from '@ember/component' (#1216)
emberjs/rfcs: text/1216-deprecate-ember-component.md

The guides have not taught classic components since Octane -- there is nothing to remove from the current guides. The work is:

- publish the deprecation guide above at [deprecations.emberjs.com](https://deprecations.emberjs.com)
- mark the class deprecated in the API docs, linking to the guide
- the [Octane vs Classic cheat sheet](https://guides.emberjs.com/release/upgrading/current-edition/) already covers most of these before/afters and should be linked from the deprecation message

## Drawbacks

Every long-lived Ember app has classic components, and unlike `inject`-vs-`service` there is no find-and-replace -- each component takes actual thought.

The mitigations are that the deprecation window is long, every intermediate step is shippable on its own (see above), and the replacement has been the default -- with documentation, lint rules, and community experience -- for over six years.

## Alternatives

- do nothing -- we keep shipping the `EventDispatcher`, the classic class machinery, and two-way bindings to every app forever, and [#1116](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/1116)/[#1117](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/1117) can never complete their removals.

> - extract the classic component into a userland package -- `setComponentManager` exists, so a `classic-component` package with its own component manager is _technically_ possible, and would give stuck apps an escape hatch past the major. This is compatible with (not an alternative to) this RFC, and could be community-maintained the way [ember-legacy-built-in-components](https://github.com/emberjs/ember-legacy-built-in-components) was for RFC #671. Notably though, such a package could not support the `click()`-style event methods without shipping its own event dispatcher.

Reviewer: If we extracted classic components into a userland package (along with its own event dispatcher) would that cause any headaches at a framework level when removing deprecated code? Any app I've touched in the last 7+ yrs has been steadily moving away from classic components so not positive it's necessary, but curious about the technical headaches around making that possible ...

Author: the last time we tried to move `@ember/string` to an external package, it was a bit of a nightmare for compatibility between all the build tools and environments, and interleaving of compatibility layers -- I think getting `@ember/string` compatibility working cost more time than if we had told people to "just use change-case" (or similar).

However,

If classic app / broccoli were deprecated and unsupported, perhaps it could be an option, because Vite prefers declared packages over the virtual packages (why you don't have `@glimmer/tracking` or `rsvp` in your package.json, for example -- because rn, they are provided by the framework's build tooling) 

So,

my preference is to deprecate and abandon ember-component altogether

_also_ because I want the machinery it relies on to be cleaned up (which is for future RFCs), and that would not be possible if we still had to support it forever (but in a separate addon) -- there is a lot more ember-component relies on than the event dispatcher :see_no_evil:

---
stage: accepted
start-date: 2026-07-27T00:00:00.000Z
release-date:
release-versions:
teams:
  - framework
  - learning
  - typescript
prs:
  accepted: https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/1216
project-link:
---

<!---
Directions for above:

stage: Leave as is
start-date: Fill in with today's date, 2032-12-01T00:00:00.000Z
release-date: Leave as is
release-versions: Leave as is
teams: Include only the [team(s)](README.md#relevant-teams) for which this RFC applies
prs:
  accepted: Fill this in with the URL for the Proposal RFC PR
project-link: Leave as is
-->

> # Deprecate `import Component from '@ember/component'`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Deprecate Classic Ember Component aka `import Component from '@ember/component'`
```

## Summary

Deprecate the classic component class -- the default export of `@ember/component`.

> Glimmer components ([`@glimmer/component`](https://api.emberjs.com/ember/release/modules/@glimmer%2Fcomponent)) have been the default since Octane (`ember-source@3.15`, 2019), and every feature of the classic component has a replacement that is smaller, easier to teach, and doesn't depend on the classic object model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Glimmer components ([`@glimmer/component`](https://api.emberjs.com/ember/release/modules/@glimmer%2Fcomponent)) have been the default component in Ember projects since Octane (`ember-source@3.15`, 2019), and every feature of the classic component has a replacement that is smaller, easier to teach, and doesn't depend on the classic object model.
```

## Motivation

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Classic Components have been replaced by Glimmer Components. The replacement was introduced nearly a decade ago and made default in 2019. We've known since we began designing Glimmer Components that the Classic Components had serious limitations and were difficult to teach. 

```

> Classic components are the largest remaining consumer of everything else we've been deprecating:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, Classic components are the largest remaining consumer of everything else we've been deprecating or working to deprecate:
```

- they extend `EmberObject`, requiring the [Classic Class system](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/1117)
- they are assembled out of [Mixins](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/1116) (`Evented`, `ActionSupport`, `TargetActionSupport`, ...)
- they are the last thing in the framework that supports two-way bindings
- their `click()` / `mouseEnter()` / etc methods require the app-wide `EventDispatcher`, which attaches delegated listeners to the root of every Ember app whether or not anything uses them

**We cannot finish removing the classic object model while the classic component still exists.**

> Deleting the classic component (at the major following this deprecation) lets us also delete the `EventDispatcher`, `Ember.View`-era internals, and the component half of the two-way binding system -- some of the oldest and most expensive code in `ember-source`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deleting the classic component (at the major following this deprecation) lets us also delete the `EventDispatcher`, `Ember.View`-era internals, and the component half of the two-way binding system -- some of the oldest and most expensive code in `ember-source`.

Removing Classic components can drastically reduce the maintenance and teaching burden of the Framework. 
```

## Transition Path

### What is deprecated

Only the _default_ export of `@ember/component`. The module itself and its named exports are unaffected:

|   | export | status |
| - | ------ | ------ |
| 🌐 | `default` (the classic `Component` class) | **deprecated** |
| 🌐 | `setComponentTemplate` | stays |
| 🌐 | `getComponentTemplate` | stays |
| 🌐 | `setComponentManager` | stays |
| 🌐 | `capabilities` | stays |

> | 🌐 | `@ember/component/template-only` | stays |

Reviewer 2: Does this export make sense without classic components?

Author: practically, it is really only used by
- build tooling (emitted)
- TS (for importing `TOC`)

I "have plans" to bring `@glint/template` in to ember-source -- perhaps under `@ember/types`, but that's a project that needs more dedicated focus as TS is a bit hinky

Since importing a module can't warn at runtime, the deprecation fires when the class is extended (via native `class extends` or `.extend()`) or instantiated:

```js
deprecate(message, false, {
  id: 'ember-component',
  until: '8.0.0',
  for: 'ember-source',
  url: 'https://deprecations.emberjs.com/id/ember-component',
  since: { available: '7.x', enabled: '7.x' }, // exact versions dependent on implementation timing
});
```

> The built-in components (`<Input>`, `<Textarea>`, `<LinkTo>`) were already moved off the classic component base class in [RFC #671](https://rfcs.emberjs.com/id/0671-modernize-built-in-components-1), so they do not trigger this deprecation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Deprecation Guide

> [!NOTE]
> gjs / gts is supported back to 3.28, and includes `@ember/component`. This allows very zebra-striped incremental migrations, if needed.

<details><summary>You only have a JS file</summary> 

```js
// before: app/components/greeting.js
import Component from '@ember/component';

export default Component.extend();
```

```hbs
{{! before: app/components/greeting.hbs }}
<p>Hello, {{@name}}!</p>
```

Delete the class. A template is a component:

```gjs
// after: app/components/greeting.gjs
<template>

>   <p>Hello, {{@name}}!</p>

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't this need the wrapping div? 

We probably have docs we can take from the Octane upgrade guide. Might be better to just link to that.

Author: ya, seems good. too many details to get right here

```js
// before: the child writes the parent's property
import Component from '@ember/component';
import { action } from '@ember/object';

export default class Counter extends Component {
  @action
  increment() {
    this.set('count', this.count + 1);
  }
}
```

```gjs
// after: the parent owns the state, the child receives a function
// parent
import Component from '@glimmer/component';
import { tracked } from '@glimmer/tracking';
import Counter from './counter';

export default class Parent extends Component {
  @tracked count = 0;

  increment = () => this.count++;

  <template>
    <Counter @count={{this.count}} @onIncrement={{this.increment}} />
  </template>
}
```

</details>

<details><summary><code>positionalParams</code></summary>

Angle bracket invocation has no positional arguments. Give the arguments names:

```hbs
{{! before }}
{{avatar user size}}
```

```hbs
{{! after }}
<Avatar @user={{user}} @size={{size}} />
```

</details>

#### Migrating incrementally

> You do not need a flag day. Classic and Glimmer components coexist in the same app, the same route, even the same template -- migrate one component at a time, in any order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You do not need to migrate everything all at once. Classic and Glimmer components coexist in the same app, the same route, even the same template -- migrate one component at a time, in any order.
```

- `eslint-plugin-ember` already has [`ember/no-classic-components`](https://github.com/ember-cli/eslint-plugin-ember/blob/main/docs/rules/no-classic-components.md) in its recommended config.
- The component blueprint has generated Glimmer components since Octane; no blueprint changes needed.
- Addons that ship classic components will need to migrate before the next major. Per usual, addon authors are expected to move faster than app authors, and the deprecation window exists for exactly this.
- Ember Inspector renders both component systems today; removal (at the major) only deletes code paths.
- SSR / Fastboot: no impact beyond the components themselves.

## How We Teach This

The guides have not taught classic components since Octane -- there is nothing to remove from the current guides. The work is:

- publish the deprecation guide above at [deprecations.emberjs.com](https://deprecations.emberjs.com)
- mark the class deprecated in the API docs, linking to the guide
- the [Octane vs Classic cheat sheet](https://guides.emberjs.com/release/upgrading/current-edition/) already covers most of these before/afters and should be linked from the deprecation message

## Drawbacks

> This is the big one. Every long-lived Ember app has classic components, and unlike `inject`-vs-`service` there is no find-and-replace -- each component takes actual thought. Apps with hundreds of classic components will feel this deprecation more than any since Octane shipped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every long-lived Ember app has classic components, and unlike `inject`-vs-`service` there is no find-and-replace -- each component takes actual thought.
```
